## Consciousness

### What Is Consciousness
Consciousness is the fact that you have experience: Suppose we would have a perfect description and functional understanding of the human mind and a perfect scan of your whole body and especially your brain. This might make it possible to understand and predict every neural activity and thought you have. But this perfect model obviously wouldn't change anything about the fact, that you have your inner experience. Even if we fully describe a system from the outside, there is still the inner experience how it 'feels' to be that system. This implies that no one can every be absolutely certain that someone else really has an internal experience. That's the definition of an internal experience: it is only experienced from the inside. Personal consciousness can take many shapes and include many perceptions, thoughts and feelings. But fundamentally consiousness is not its contents but it is what takes on these shapes.

### Qualia
In philosophy the internal experiences which constitute your sentience are called qualia. And especially the question where qualia come from has baffled thinkers for centuries: It seems like there is no place for them in our physical understanding of reality. Even a perfect model of the brain doesn't include qualia. It might describe how photons enter the eye what then results in certain neural activity but it will not include the feeling itself how it is to see the color red for example. This is called 'the hard problem of consciousness'. But this problem doesn't exist with the correct understanding of qualia: They are the internal subjective experiences of a system. For every external description of a system there exists how it feels to be that system. Then obviously qualia are not contained in the description, because the description is not the system itself, which is the only thing with access to it's subjective experience. Qualia and physical description are two different sides of the same coin. Every internal experience has an external physical embodiment. This gives physics the role of describing everything there is about the external reality while still leaving room for qualia as the corresponding internal reality of what was described.

### How Do Qualia Enter The World?
We can investigate how qualia might enter the world starting with something we assume to have qualia and slowly decomposing it to find the roots of the internal experience: l think we all agree that there is an internal experience how it is to be human. All evidence points towards our body and specifically our brain as the physical embodiment of this experience.  But the body and brain started with one cell. When was the 'magical' moment when qualia entered your body? We could go back to your first memories, but most likely you already experienced something before those memories and just forgot and certainly your parents treated you as if. From the outside it looks like already a newborn has subjective experiences since it shows interactive behavior. But we also know that  experiences are collected during pregnancy and even play a vital role in the babies development. Rather than having one discrete moment when qualia entered our body it seems like there is a continous development starting from very simple experiences as an embryo to highly abstract and differentiated mental states as an adult. And your consciousness continues to evolve, just think of yourself 10 years ago. I would assume that love and death now mean something different for you or got enriched. And most likely this will continue in the next 10 years.

If consciousness and qualia are on a continous spectrum then what is its beginning, what is the minimal mental state? A certain number of neurons? But what if we repeatedly remove single cells from a brain - it seems rather arbitrary that there is a single cell which removes all qualia from the system. If you are missing certain parts of your brain surely certain parts of your experience will change or vanish, but there will still be some kind of experience left. But even a single neuron is a highly complex system with millions of proteins working together to perform suffisticated chemical reactions which enable our thoughts. Would taking away one protein suddenly remove subjective experience? And what about when we take away one atom from the protein?

### Panpsychism
If we can't find a good and consistent explanation when and how qualia enters a system then a possible solution is that subjective experience was there from the very beginning. This idea is called Panpsychism and it's not only a plan B but actually very elegant and plausible: Everything that exists also has an internal perspective how it is to be that thing; a mental state or a subjective experience. This also includes the (so far) most fundamental units of existence like electrons, photons and quarks. It might sound crazy that an electron has a mental state, but obviously these mental states are very different from our own experiences. They are unimaginable simple and panpsychists often call them protomental states. We can think of them as the fundamental building blocks of more complex feelings and thoughts: As electrons and protons form atoms, which form molecules, which form cells, which form your brain, all the protomental states mirror this increase in complexity finally resulting in your experiences as your neurons fire.

### A Question Of Existence Itself
Is arguing that consciousnes exists from the very beginning on only a cheap trick because we couldn't find a solution to where qualia enter a system? And what did we actually gain, since in the end panpsychism is not answering where the proto mental states come from in the first place. And actually panpsychism doesn't have an answer, but physics also doesn't have an answer why something exists rather than nothing. Why does energy and matter exist at all and why did the universe come into existence? These are interesting questions but most of the time we don't have a problem accepting that the universe exists. Why not integrate qualia directly into this understanding of existence. We should still wonder about how the universe came to be and try to further understand the big bang or develop better theories for the beginning of the universe. But why not extend our understanding of existence itself to also contain qualia. After all we ARE talking about existence itself, about the existence of personal experience. From this perspective it seems rather arbitrary or even unplausible that why matter and energy exists should be answered differently than the existence of qualia. Both are questions of existence. So rather than having a 'hard problem of matter' AND the 'hard problem of consciousness' we can unify them into a single 'hard problem of existence'. That's why panpsychism is an elegant perspective rather than a plan B.
