# Patterns of Meaning
There are many different perspectives on the nature of our mind: Psychology, Philosophy, Linguistics, Physics, Neuro science, Artificial Intelligence and Spirituality... A great explanation for the mind has to acknowledge every perspective and should serve as a plattform of shared understanding where the individual perspectives can meet and learn from each other.

# Overview
* I'll start of by claryfying what I mean when I use the word consciousness
* Then I'll give you my favorite answer to the question 'how is our consciousness related to the brain?' by introducing an Information Theory of Consciousness
* Lastly I'll give you my favorite answer to the question 'where does consciousness fundamentally come from?' by introducing Panpsychism


## Subjective experiences itself as the meaning of consciousness
Suppose we would have a perfect description and functional understanding of the human mind and a perfect scan of your whole body and especially your brain. This might make it possible to understand and predict every neural activity and thought you have. But this perfect model obviously wouldn't change anything about the fact, that you have your inner experience: **Even if we fully describe a system from the outside, there is still the inner experience how it 'feels' to be that system.** Internal experience and external description are directly coupled. They are two different perspectives on the same thing. Metaphorically speaking two sides of a coin. The existence of inner experience is what I'll refer to when talking about consciousness and not the notion of self-consciousness or 'being consciouss of something' which are specific inner experiences linked to specific cognitive functions.


# An Information Theory of Consciousness and its Implications for free will and the self
This text is heavily inspired by the Integrated Information Theory of Consciousness and might serve as a non exhaustive introduction. The full theory has some aspects which I won't cover in this text; I rather focus on some key ideas which might be more compatible with other perspectives, therefore I'm calling it 'An Information Theory of Consciousness'.

## Experience is the information within a system
How is our mind related to the brain? Or more general: how is the inner experience of a system related to its physical substrate? Our brain contains billions of neurons. If they 'fire' they send an electrical pulse, called spike, to other neurons. These spikes are physically quite similar throughout the brain, but if they happen in a specific region of the brain they cause a visual experience while in other regions they might cause the feeling of joy. How can a similar physical phenomenon cause such a different experience? An Information Theory of Consciousness can give an explanation: The neuron spikes in different brain regions represent a different information and are therefore linked to different internal experiences. It's not about the isolated physical phenomenon of a neural spike but about its represented meaning in the system. **The information represented in a system is the internal experience of that system.**

## Implications for free will
My free will feels like that I have intentions and that I can deliberately act upon them. This implies that my system contains information that represents exactly this fact; that the system itself has intentions and can out of its own act upon them. When it acts upon its intentions it links the resulting action with the information that the system itself caused the action. **The system contains the information that itself is the cause of the action and therefore it has the feeling of free will.**

### Free will cannot be explained outside the laws of nature
We could understand free will as not being fully determined by the laws of nature and therefore as the power to influence a system outside of the laws of physcs. But the laws of nature are the fundamental mechanisms of existence implying that a free will that is beyond those laws can't be explained and therefore fails as an explanation. With the same logic nothing can be explained outside of the laws of nature.

### The existence of free will is a question of perspective
* If we understand free will as rejecting that the mind is physically determined, then free will does not exist and is an illusion. Although this doesn't change the fact that the illusion/feeling of free will really exists.
* If we understand free will as the ability of a system to choose actions based on some internal mechanism then free will is real. Although this doesn't change the fact that the internal mechanism is determined by the laws of physics.

## Implications for the self:
My feeling of a self comes from my system containing a representation of itself that is in contrast to things that are represented as being seperate from the system. The system maintains a model of the world and a model of itself within this world. The self model contains representations for the own body and also personal information and character traits. Interestingly the body-self-model seems to be strongly linked to our body perceptions and is quite easily tricked: [Rubber Hand Illusion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Body_transfer_illusion#Rubber_hand_illusion).

### Experience without the feeling of self
The feeling of a self is 'just another' experience linked to internal representations in the system. The ability for an internal experience is not dependent on an internal representation of a self model. Rather its linked to any internal representation at all. This means that the feeling of self will vanish if the system no longer identifies with the self model. But experience itself will not vanish. The self model might simply become an inseperable part of the world model. This might still allow to feel the body or ones desires but without identifying with it and therefore without the feeling of a self. [Such an experience is possible and typically experienced through the use of psychedelic substances](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ego_death). As one might expect it is reported to be a profound experience. If you have an experience without a feeling of self, then it strongly suggests that 'you' are not the representation of yourself, but rather the system that simply has an experience. 

# Where does subjective experience come from? Introducing Panpsychism
The ideas in the following text are basicly unfalsifiable. I think they are still worth considering based on the ocams razor style argument of being a minimal consistent explanation. I think everything else needs more assumptions or runs into contradictions. Change my mind :)

## Our internal phenomenological reality: Qualia
In philosophy the internal experiences which constitute your sentience are called qualia. And especially the question where qualia come from has baffled thinkers for centuries: It seems like there is no place for them in our physical understanding of reality. Even a perfect model of the brain doesn't include qualia. It might describe how photons enter the eye what then results in certain neural activity but it will not include the feeling itself how it is to see the color red for example. This is called 'the hard problem of consciousness'. But this problem doesn't exist with the correct understanding of qualia: They are the internal subjective experiences of a system. For every external description of a system there exists how it feels to be that system. Then obviously qualia are not contained in the description, because the description is not the system itself, which is the only thing with access to its subjective experience. Qualia and physical description are two different sides of the same coin. Every internal experience has an external physical embodiment. This gives physics the role of describing everything there is about the external reality while still leaving room for qualia as the corresponding internal reality of what was described.

## How Do Qualia Enter The World?
We can investigate how qualia might enter the world by starting with something we assume to have qualia and slowly decomposing it to find the roots of the internal experience: I think we all agree that there is an internal experience how it is to be oneself. All evidence points towards our body and specifically our brain as the physical embodiment of this experience. But the body and brain started from one cell. When was the 'magical' moment when qualia entered your body? We could go back to your first memories as an early evidence of subjective experience, but most likely you already experienced something before those memories and just forgot it. From the outside it looks like already a newborn has subjective experiences since it shows interactive behavior. But we also know that experiences are collected during pregnancy and even play a vital role in the babies development. Rather than having one discrete moment when qualia entered our body it seems like there is a continuous development starting from very simple experiences as an embryo to highly abstract and differentiated mental states as an adult and still continuing to evolve.

If consciousness and qualia are on a continuous spectrum, then what is its beginning, what is the minimal mental state? A certain number of neurons? But what if we repeatedly remove single cells from a brain - it seems rather arbitrary that there is a single cell which abruptly removes all qualia from the system. If you are missing certain parts of your brain for sure certain parts of your experience will change or vanish, but there will still be some kind of experience left. Even a single neuron is a highly complex system with millions of proteins working together to perform sophisticated chemical reactions which enable our thoughts. Would taking away one protein suddenly remove all subjective experience? And what about when we take away one atom from the protein?

## Panpsychism
If we can't find a good and consistent explanation when and how qualia enters a system then a possible solution is that subjective experience was there from the very beginning. This idea is called Panpsychism and it's not only a plan B but in my opinion very elegant and plausible: Everything that exists also has an internal perspective how it is to be that thing; a mental state or a subjective experience. This also includes the most fundamental units of existence like electrons, photons and quarks. It might sound far fetched that an electron has a mental state, but obviously these mental states are very different from our own experiences. They are unimaginable simple and panpsychists call them protomental states. We can think of them as the fundamental building blocks of more complex feelings and thoughts: As electrons and protons form atoms, which form molecules, which form cells, which form your brain, all the protomental states mirror this increase in complexity finally resulting in your experiences as your neurons fire.

## A Question Of Existence Itself
Is arguing that consciousness exists from the very beginning only a cheap trick because we couldn't find a solution to where qualia enter a system? And what did we actually gain, since in the end panpsychism is not answering where the proto mental states come from in the first place. And actually panpsychism doesn't have an answer, but physics also doesn't have an answer why something exists rather than nothing. Why does energy and matter exist at all and why did the universe come into existence? These are interesting questions but most of the time we don't have a problem accepting that the universe exists. Why not integrate qualia directly into this understanding of existence. We should still wonder about how the universe came to be and try to further understand the big bang or develop better theories for the beginning of the universe. But why not extend our understanding of existence itself to also contain qualia. After all we ARE talking about existence itself, about the existence of personal experience. From this perspective it seems rather arbitrary or even unplausible that why matter and energy exists should be answered differently than the existence of qualia. Both are questions of existence. So rather than having a 'hard problem of matter' AND the 'hard problem of consciousness' we can unify them into a single 'hard problem of existence'. That's why panpsychism is an elegant perspective rather than a plan B.
